content/posts/switching_hugo_versions.md, before:

---
title: "Switching Hugo Versions"
date: 2025-04-05T14:37:40+03:00
description: "Using Hugo Version Manager to install multiple Hugo versions on a single workstation"
tags: ["Hugo"]
draft: true
---

{{< figure src="https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1737737351943-82e01f866e53?q=80&w=2070&auto=format&fit=crop&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=M3wxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8fA%3D%3D"  title="" >}}

*Photo by [Maik Winnecke](https://unsplash.com/@maik_wi?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/a-laptop-computer-sitting-on-top-of-a-wooden-desk-JQyMJFh59xY?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash>)*


 #### TL;DR

 1. You can't manage multiple Hugo versions through `brew`.
 2. Reverting to older versions through `brew` is difficult.
 3. There are a couple of ways of using multiple Hugo versions simultaneously. Pick what's best for your case.
 4. Hugo Version Manager is an easy way of handling multiple Hugo versions whilst allowing existing installations coexist.  


For quite some time I wanted to build for myself a knowledge base. Most of the times I take manual notes (yes, on an actual physical notepad). It's too difficult though to store and query them when you need a refresher. I also take notes in Notion, but I would like to be able to browse my knowledge base offline. Finally, I decided to build my unified knowledge base as a static site with Hugo. 

As soon as I started building my new Hugo site, I realized that most themes of my liking needed a newer Hugo version. I was skeptical of bumping to the latest version, as I hadn't updated my personal blog in ages. Updating Hugo could mean that I wouldn't be able to publish a new post. 

Nevertheless, I tried to update to the latest Hugo, and to no one's surprise building my blog failed. 

## Reverting to an Older Hugo Version

I originally had installed Hugo through `brew`. I learned the hard way that `brew` only supports the latest Hugo version and not older ones. There was a quick and hacky workaround to downgrade to an older version(thanks to [the Hugo community](https://discourse.gohugo.io/t/switching-hugo-versions/38251/2) ❤️ ).

The steps were:
1. Find the `brew` bottle of the specific Hugo version you want to downgrade to in the [HomeBrew repo](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core).
2. Download the formula file locally(let's say as `hugo.rb`).
3. Install it by running `brew install hugo.rb`.
4. Verify you installed the appropriate version by running `hugo version`.

## But I need to work with multiple Hugo versions

I still needed to have a different version of Hugo for my personal blog and a newer one for the knowledge base that I am building. There are multiple ways of doing so, but my personal choice was Hugo Version Manager(a.k.a. `hvm`).

### 1. Installing Hugo via NPM

One way to install Hugo is via NPM with [`hugo-installer`](https://github.com/dominique-mueller/hugo-installer) [^1] . Installing NPM on my local workstation when I do not use `NodeJS` in my daily life was too much for my needs. An extra drawback are that you [cannot use the `hugo` commands](https://www.brycewray.com/posts/2023/02/hugo-via-npm/#any-sour-points).

### 2. Installing via the asdf Version Manager

[`asdf`](https://asdf-vm.com/) is a version manager which allows to install various runtime versions,including Hugo [^2]. Even though this had some potential, I opted in using `hvm` for the reasons stated on [the related section](#6-installing-via-hugo-version-manager).

### 3. Installing via Docker

Another way that you can manage different Hugo versions is using Docker [^3]. Again I felt that this was overkill.

### 4. Building from the source

I feel this is to much work if the only thing that you need on your day to day is to manage your site. [^4]

### 5. Create a custom tap with the specific Hugo versions of your choice

Once again, creating a GitHub repo to manage your own tap feels a lot of work, at least when there are other alternatives. On the other hand, maybe it's better suited if you do not want to install a third-party version manager on your machine and use your own tap and `brew`. [^5]

### 6. Installing via Hugo Version Manager

This was the option that I opted in. `hvm` allows to easily set a default Hugo version and use different ones if needed for different projects. It is installed with `go` and actively maintained by one of Hugo's maintainers([Joe Mooring](https://github.com/jmooring)). It suited my needs like a glove. [^6] 

#### Managing Hugo with Hugo Version Manager

Following the official instructions, assuming the Go programming language is already present, we can install `hvm` by the following command:

```bash
$ go install github.com/jmooring/hvm@latest
````

The previous command probably installs `hvm` on Go's path, under the `bin` directory. To double check that run the following:

```bash
$ ls "$(echo $(go env GOPATH)/bin)"
hvm         # <--- This should be the result for a successful hvm installation

```

Make sure to add the `hvm` installation directory on the `PATH` variable.

`hvm` allows for an easy way to override existing installation:

```bash
$ hvm gen alias zsh # <----- change zsh with the shell you are using
## Output 
# Hugo Version Manager: override path to the hugo executable.
hugo() {
  hvm_show_status=true
  if hugo_bin=$(hvm status --printExecPathCached); then
    if [ "${hvm_show_status}" = "true" ]; then
      >&2 printf "Hugo version management is enabled in this directory.\\n"
      >&2 printf "Run 'hvm status' for details, or 'hvm disable' to disable.\\n\\n"
    fi
  else
    if hugo_bin=$(hvm status --printExecPath); then
      if ! hvm use --useVersionInDotFile; then
        return 1
      fi
    else
      if ! hugo_bin=$(whence -p hugo); then
        >&2 printf "Command not found.\\n"
        return 1
      fi
    fi
  fi
  "${hugo_bin}" "$@"
}
## End of Outpout

```

The output is a method which allows to fallback to the existing `hugo` installation when  `hvm` is not configured. Add the method above on the `.zshrc` file(or the appropriate configuration file of the shell of your choice).

Double check that there are no Hugo installations managed by `hvm`.
```bash
$ hvm status
Version management is disabled in the current directory.
The cache is empty.
```
Then, navigate to the site that you need to install the new Hugo version:
```bash
$ hvm use

  1) v0.145.0              2) v0.144.2              3) v0.144.1            
  4) v0.144.0              5) v0.143.1              6) v0.143.0            
  7) v0.142.0              8) v0.141.0              9) v0.140.2            
 10) v0.140.1             11) v0.140.0             12) v0.139.5            
 13) v0.139.4             14) v0.139.3             15) v0.139.2            
 16) v0.139.1             17) v0.139.0             18) v0.138.0            
 19) v0.137.1             20) v0.137.0             21) v0.136.5            
 22) v0.136.4             23) v0.136.3             24) v0.136.2            
 25) v0.136.1             26) v0.136.0             27) v0.135.0            
 28) v0.134.3             29) v0.134.2             30) v0.134.1            

Select a version to use in the current directory: 
```

Select the version that you need by pressing the appropriate number. The output will change with newer Hugo versions. If you need to install an older one that is not visible, check the appropriate configuration. [^7]


Running `hugo version` should point to the `hvm` managed one.
```bash
$ hugo version
Hugo version management is enabled in this directory.
Run 'hvm status' for details, or 'hvm disable' to disable.

hugo v0.145.0-666444f0a52132f9fec9f71cf25b441cc6a4f355+extended darwin/arm64 BuildDate=2025-02-26T15:41:25Z VendorInfo=gohugoio
```

On the other hand, running `hugo version` on my old blog should point to the `brew` Hugo version
```bash
$ hugo version
hugo v0.104.3+extended darwin/arm64 BuildDate=unknown
```

## Final Outcome

Now I am ready to use the newer Hugo version that I need to build my knowledge base static site and continue using the old one for my blog.


[^1]: https://www.brycewray.com/posts/2023/02/hugo-via-npm/)
[^2]: https://www.andbible.com/post/hugo/how-to-switch-to-different-version-of-hugo-framework/#4-use-version-managers-like-asdf-flexible-for-multiple-projects
[^3]: https://natenatters.dev/posts/hugo-and-docker/
[^4]: https://gist.github.com/peterwake/2851767e4424d11688d9a6f40149c3da
[^5]: https://github.com/orgs/Homebrew/discussions/2941#discussioncomment-2155711
[^6]: https://github.com/jmooring/hvm
[^7]: https://github.com/jmooring/hvm?tab=readme-ov-file#configuration

Commit message:

Rework the working with different Hugo versions part

content/posts/switching_hugo_versions.md, after:

---
title: "Switching Hugo Versions"
date: 2025-04-05T14:37:40+03:00
description: "Using Hugo Version Manager to install multiple Hugo versions on a single workstation"
tags: ["Hugo"]
draft: true
---

{{< figure src="https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1737737351943-82e01f866e53?q=80&w=2070&auto=format&fit=crop&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=M3wxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8fA%3D%3D"  title="" >}}

*Photo by [Maik Winnecke](https://unsplash.com/@maik_wi?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/a-laptop-computer-sitting-on-top-of-a-wooden-desk-JQyMJFh59xY?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash>)*


 #### TL;DR

 1. You can't manage multiple Hugo versions through `brew`.
 2. Reverting to older versions through `brew` is difficult.
 3. There are a couple of ways of using multiple Hugo versions simultaneously. Pick what's best for your case.
 4. Hugo Version Manager is an easy way of handling multiple Hugo versions whilst allowing existing installations coexist.  


For quite some time I wanted to build for myself a knowledge base. Most of the times I take manual notes (yes, on an actual physical notepad). It's too difficult though to store and query them when you need a refresher. I also take notes in Notion, but I would like to be able to browse my knowledge base offline. Finally, I decided to build my unified knowledge base as a static site with Hugo. 

As soon as I started building my new Hugo site, I realized that most themes of my liking needed a newer Hugo version. I was skeptical of bumping to the latest version, as I hadn't updated my personal blog in ages. Updating Hugo could mean that I wouldn't be able to publish a new post. 

Nevertheless, I tried to update to the latest Hugo, and to no one's surprise building my blog failed. 

## Reverting to an Older Hugo Version

I originally had installed Hugo through `brew`. I learned the hard way that `brew` only supports the latest Hugo version and not older ones. There was a quick and hacky workaround to downgrade to an older version(thanks to [the Hugo community](https://discourse.gohugo.io/t/switching-hugo-versions/38251/2) ❤️ ).

The steps were:
1. Find the `brew` bottle of the specific Hugo version you want to downgrade to in the [HomeBrew repo](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core).
2. Download the formula file locally(let's say as `hugo.rb`).
3. Install it by running `brew install hugo.rb`.
4. Verify you installed the appropriate version by running `hugo version`.

## But I need to work with multiple Hugo versions

I still needed to work with Hugo versions at the same time. here are several ways of doing so, but my personal choice was Hugo Version Manager(a.k.a. `hvm`).

### 1. Installing Hugo via NPM

One way to install Hugo is via NPM with [`hugo-installer`](https://github.com/dominique-mueller/hugo-installer) [^1] . Installing NPM on my local workstation when I do not use `NodeJS` in my daily life was too much for my needs. An extra drawback are that you [cannot use the `hugo` commands](https://www.brycewray.com/posts/2023/02/hugo-via-npm/#any-sour-points).

### 2. Installing via the asdf Version Manager

[`asdf`](https://asdf-vm.com/) is a version manager which allows to install various runtime versions,including Hugo [^2]. Even though this had some potential, I opted in using `hvm` for the reasons stated on [the related section](#6-installing-via-hugo-version-manager).

### 3. Installing via Docker

Another way that you can manage different Hugo versions is using Docker [^3]. Again I felt that this was overkill.

### 4. Building from the source

I feel this is to much work if the only thing that you need on your day to day is to manage your site. [^4]

### 5. Create a custom tap with the specific Hugo versions of your choice

Once again, creating a GitHub repo to manage your own tap feels a lot of work, at least when there are other alternatives. On the other hand, maybe it's better suited if you do not want to install a third-party version manager on your machine and use your own tap and `brew`. [^5]

### 6. Installing via Hugo Version Manager

This was the option that I opted in. `hvm` allows to easily set a default Hugo version and use different ones if needed for different projects. It is installed with `go` and actively maintained by one of Hugo's maintainers([Joe Mooring](https://github.com/jmooring)). It suited my needs like a glove. [^6] 

#### Managing Hugo with Hugo Version Manager

Following the official instructions, assuming the Go programming language is already present, we can install `hvm` by the following command:

```bash
$ go install github.com/jmooring/hvm@latest
````

The previous command probably installs `hvm` on Go's path, under the `bin` directory. To double check that run the following:

```bash
$ ls "$(echo $(go env GOPATH)/bin)"
hvm         # <--- This should be the result for a successful hvm installation

```

Make sure to add the `hvm` installation directory on the `PATH` variable.

`hvm` allows for an easy way to override existing installation:

```bash
$ hvm gen alias zsh # <----- change zsh with the shell you are using
## Output 
# Hugo Version Manager: override path to the hugo executable.
hugo() {
  hvm_show_status=true
  if hugo_bin=$(hvm status --printExecPathCached); then
    if [ "${hvm_show_status}" = "true" ]; then
      >&2 printf "Hugo version management is enabled in this directory.\\n"
      >&2 printf "Run 'hvm status' for details, or 'hvm disable' to disable.\\n\\n"
    fi
  else
    if hugo_bin=$(hvm status --printExecPath); then
      if ! hvm use --useVersionInDotFile; then
        return 1
      fi
    else
      if ! hugo_bin=$(whence -p hugo); then
        >&2 printf "Command not found.\\n"
        return 1
      fi
    fi
  fi
  "${hugo_bin}" "$@"
}
## End of Outpout

```

The output is a method which allows to fallback to the existing `hugo` installation when  `hvm` is not configured. Add the method above on the `.zshrc` file(or the appropriate configuration file of the shell of your choice).

Double check that there are no Hugo installations managed by `hvm`.
```bash
$ hvm status
Version management is disabled in the current directory.
The cache is empty.
```
Then, navigate to the site that you need to install the new Hugo version:
```bash
$ hvm use

  1) v0.145.0              2) v0.144.2              3) v0.144.1            
  4) v0.144.0              5) v0.143.1              6) v0.143.0            
  7) v0.142.0              8) v0.141.0              9) v0.140.2            
 10) v0.140.1             11) v0.140.0             12) v0.139.5            
 13) v0.139.4             14) v0.139.3             15) v0.139.2            
 16) v0.139.1             17) v0.139.0             18) v0.138.0            
 19) v0.137.1             20) v0.137.0             21) v0.136.5            
 22) v0.136.4             23) v0.136.3             24) v0.136.2            
 25) v0.136.1             26) v0.136.0             27) v0.135.0            
 28) v0.134.3             29) v0.134.2             30) v0.134.1            

Select a version to use in the current directory: 
```

Select the version that you need by pressing the appropriate number. The output will change with newer Hugo versions. If you need to install an older one that is not visible, check the appropriate configuration. [^7]


Running `hugo version` should point to the `hvm` managed one.
```bash
$ hugo version
Hugo version management is enabled in this directory.
Run 'hvm status' for details, or 'hvm disable' to disable.

hugo v0.145.0-666444f0a52132f9fec9f71cf25b441cc6a4f355+extended darwin/arm64 BuildDate=2025-02-26T15:41:25Z VendorInfo=gohugoio
```

On the other hand, running `hugo version` on my old blog should point to the `brew` Hugo version
```bash
$ hugo version
hugo v0.104.3+extended darwin/arm64 BuildDate=unknown
```

## Final Outcome

Now I am ready to use the newer Hugo version that I need to build my knowledge base static site and continue using the old one for my blog.


[^1]: https://www.brycewray.com/posts/2023/02/hugo-via-npm/)
[^2]: https://www.andbible.com/post/hugo/how-to-switch-to-different-version-of-hugo-framework/#4-use-version-managers-like-asdf-flexible-for-multiple-projects
[^3]: https://natenatters.dev/posts/hugo-and-docker/
[^4]: https://gist.github.com/peterwake/2851767e4424d11688d9a6f40149c3da
[^5]: https://github.com/orgs/Homebrew/discussions/2941#discussioncomment-2155711
[^6]: https://github.com/jmooring/hvm
[^7]: https://github.com/jmooring/hvm?tab=readme-ov-file#configuration
